[Concept Entry] AI: Unsupervised Learning (#6182)
Codecademy/docs: content/ai/concepts/machine-learning/terms/unsupervised-learning/unsupervised-learning.md

---
Title: 'Unsupervised Learning'
Description: 'Unsupervised Learning is a type of machine learning where a model identifies patterns, structures, or relationships in unlabeled data without explicit supervision.'
Subjects:
  - 'AI'
  - 'Data Science'
  - 'Machine Learning'
Tags:
  - 'AI'
  - 'Deep Learning'
  - 'Classification'
  - 'Regression'
CatalogContent:
  - 'learn-python-3'
  - 'paths/computer-science'
---

> **Unsupervised Learning** is a type of machine learning where the model is trained on data without explicit labels or supervision. The goal is for the algorithm to identify underlying patterns, structures, or distributions within the data without any predefined outcomes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Unsupervised Learning** is a machine learning approach where the model is trained on unlabeled data, meaning there are no predefined target values. The goal is for the algorithm to identify hidden patterns, structures, or relationships in the data.
```

## Key Concepts

> - **Data Without Labels**: Unlike supervised learning, the data used in unsupervised learning does not have associated target labels. The model must infer relationships and structures from the input data alone.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Data Without Labels**: Unlike [supervised learning](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/ai/machine-learning/supervised-learning), the data used in unsupervised learning does not have associated target labels. The model must infer relationships and structures from the input data alone.
```

> - **Clusters**: Grouping similar data points together, based on some criteria.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Clusters**: Grouping similar data points together based on shared characteristics.
```

- **Dimensionality Reduction**: Reducing the number of features in the dataset while preserving essential information, often to improve model efficiency or visualization.
- **Anomaly Detection**: Identifying data points that deviate significantly from the expected pattern.

## Types of Unsupervised Learning

> 1. **Clustering**: Organizing data into groups (clusters) where items within a group are more similar to each other than to items in other groups. Common algorithms include:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Clustering**: Organizing data into groups (clusters) where items within the same cluster are more similar to each other than to those in other clusters. Common algorithms include:

```

   - **DBSCAN (Density-Based Spatial Clustering)**: Groups data based on density, effective for irregularly shaped clusters.

2. **Association**: Finding rules that describe relationships between variables in large datasets. A common algorithm is:

   - **Apriori**: Used for discovering association rules in transactional data.

3. **Dimensionality Reduction**: Reducing the number of input variables in a dataset while retaining important information, making the data easier to visualize and process. Key methods include:

   - **Principal Component Analysis (PCA)**: Identifies the principal components that explain the variance in the data.
   - **t-SNE (t-Distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding)**: A non-linear method that reduces dimensions while preserving local data structure.

4. **Anomaly Detection**: Identifying rare or unusual patterns in data that do not conform to the expected behavior, used in fraud detection or network security.

## Applications

- **Customer Segmentation**: Grouping customers based on purchasing behavior to target marketing efforts.
- **Market Basket Analysis**: Identifying associations between products frequently bought together.

> - **Image Compression**: Reducing the number of pixels or features in an image without losing significant information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Image Compression**: Reducing image size while preserving essential details.
```
